So we talked a little bit about the Soviet union and I happened to have lived
through the collapse of the Soviet union.
And so what are the factors,
the causes in your mind to why the Soviet union
collapsed?
So I, you know, definitely a multivariate situation.
I think there's a lot of factors. Um,
one that jumped out to me recently, again,
from that documentary that I didn't note before,
was that at one point Stalin eliminated,
I think 75% of his intelligence force. Hmm. Um,
which I think when you're competing with another nation state, you know,
and intelligence and cover operations are very integral to your survival.
I think that was a, uh, definitely a shot in the foot,
but at a higher level,
I would say that capitalism and communism were each
resource Strat of the 20th century nation state. Um,
and they seem, you know, we commonly consider them to be diametrically opposed,
but there's actually a lot of commonality between the two.
The difference would be that in Soviet Russia,
as we alluded to earlier, they tried to completely replace price signals
with this nationalistic faith and devotion.
So it mm-hmm, <affirmative> it, they removed the economic nerve signal,
which coordinated the allocation of capital over time.
So this inhibited their ability to generate wealth.
Whereas in the United States,
we left most markets open to free enterprise. So we,
we honored the integrity of price signals and we allowed people to
trade and accumulate wealth. Um,
so in every market, except the market for money,
both markets maintained essential bank as we, as we've gotten to. So
I think in a really big picture standpoint, that's why
capitalism out competes communism is because it is able to generate
more wealth than communism was.
And therefore was able to put financial pressure on the USS R until
it reached the point of bankruptcy.
Essentially this a similar model I would argue
is that for the same reasons we saw
capitalism out compete communism, which I think at the, the,
the data that I recall was that the USS R's economy was valued
at close to one third of its inputs.
So if you just didn't do anything inside the USSR and just sold all the raw
materials that were going into it,
it would've been worth three times as much as sending the materials in,
running it through the efforts and then shipping things back out, it was,
it was value destructive versus value creative. And I would argue,
this is because again, the,
the centralized computing model versus decentralized computing model,
it just became more and more corrupt over time. Um,
it got to the point where I think most of the occupations in USSR towards the
end were as informants, right? They were working for the state. Um,
drew Peterson makes this point too,
that at some point it was actually illegal to be sad in Soviet Russia,
because if you were sad,
you were contradicting the utopian view of the state. So if you were sad,
you're implying the state's not doing something wrong.